FAFNISMOL
The Ballad of Fafnir
<END PAGE>
1. "Youth, oh, youth! |
of whom then, youth,
art thou born?
Say whose son thou
art,
Who in Fafnir's blood |
<END PAGE>
thy bright blade
reddened,
And struck thy sword
to my heart."
Sigurth concealed his
<END PAGE>
name because it was
believed in olden times
that the word of a
dying man might
have great power if he
cursed his foe by his
name. He said:

<END PAGE>
2. "The Noble Hart | my
name, and I go
A motherless man
abroad;
Father I had not, | as
<END PAGE>
others have,
And lonely ever I live."

Fafnir spake:
3. "If father thou
<END PAGE>
hadst not, | as others
have,
By what wonder wast
thou born?
(Though thy name on
the day | of my death
<END PAGE>
thou hidest,
Thou knowest now thou
dost lie.)"

Sigurth spake:
4. "My race, methinks, |
<END PAGE>
is unknown to thee,
And so am I myself;
Sigurth my name, | and
Sigmund's son,
Who smote thee thus
with the sword."
<END PAGE>
Fafnir spake:
5. "Who drove thee on?
| why wert thou driven
My life to make me
lose?
A father brave | had
<END PAGE>
the bright-eyed youth,
For bold in boyhood
thou art."

Sigurth spake:
6. "My heart did drive
<END PAGE>
me, | my hand fulfilled,
And my shining sword
so sharp;
Few are keen | when
old age comes,
Who timid in boyhood
<END PAGE>
be."

Fafnir spake:
7. "If thou mightest
grow | thy friends
among,
<END PAGE>
One might see thee
fiercely fight;
But bound thou art, |
and in battle taken,
And to fear are
<END PAGE>
prisoners prone."

Sigurth spake:
8. "Thou blamest me,
Fafnir, | that I see
from afar
<END PAGE>
The wealth that my
father's was;
Not bound am I, |
though in battle taken,
Thou hast found that
<END PAGE>
free I live."

Fafnir spake:
9. "In all I say | dost
thou hatred see,
Yet truth alone do I
<END PAGE>
tell;
The sounding gold, |
the glow-red wealth,
And the rings thy bane
shall be."

<END PAGE>
Sigurth spake:
10. "Some one the
hoard | shall ever
hold,
Till the destined day
<END PAGE>
shall come;
For a time there is |
when every man
Shall journey hence to
hell."

<END PAGE>
Fafnir spake:
11. "The fate of the
Norns | before the
headland
Thou findest, and doom
<END PAGE>
of a fool;
In the water shalt
drown | if thou row
'gainst the wind,
All danger is near to
death."
<END PAGE>
Sigurth spake:
12. "Tell me then,
Fafnir, | for wise thou
art famed,
And much thou knowest
<END PAGE>
now:
Who are the Norns |
who are helpful in
need,
And the babe from the
mother bring?"
<END PAGE>
Fafnir spake:
13. "Of many births |
the Norns must be,
Nor one in race they
were;
Some to gods, others |
<END PAGE>
to elves are kin,
And Dvalin's daughters
some."

Sigurth spake:
14. "Tell me then,
<END PAGE>
Fafnir, | for wise thou
art famed,
And much thou knowest
now:
How call they the isle |
where all the gods
And Surt shall
<END PAGE>
sword-sweat mingle?"

Fafnir spake:
15. "Oskopnir is it, |
where all the gods
Shall seek the play of
<END PAGE>
swords;
Bilrost breaks | when
they cross the bridge,
And the steeds shall
swim in the flood.

<END PAGE>
16. "The fear-helm I
wore | to afright
mankind,
While guarding my gold
I lay;
Mightier seemed I | than
<END PAGE>
any man,
For a fiercer never I
found."

Sigurth spake:
17. "The fear-helm
<END PAGE>
surely | no man shields
When he faces a
valiant foe;
Oft one finds, | when
the foe he meets,
That he is not the
<END PAGE>
bravest of all."

Fafnir spake:
18. "Venom I breathed |
when bright I lay
By the hoard my
<END PAGE>
father had;
(There was none so
mighty | as dared to
meet me,
And weapons nor wiles
I feared.)"
<END PAGE>
Sigurth spake:
19. "Glittering worm, |
thy hissing was great,
And hard didst show
thy heart;
But hatred more | have
<END PAGE>
the sons of men
For him who owns the
helm."

Fafnir spake:
20. "I counsel thee,
<END PAGE>
Sigurth, | heed my
speech,
And ride thou
homeward hence,
The sounding gold, |
the glow-red wealth,
And the rings thy bane
<END PAGE>
shall be."

Sigurth spake:
21. "Thy counsel is
given, | but go I shall
To the gold in the
<END PAGE>
heather hidden;
And, Fafnir, thou | with
death dost fight,
Lying where Hel shall
have thee."

<END PAGE>
Fafnir spake:
22. "Regin betrayed me,
| and thee will betray,
Us both to death will he
bring;
His life, methinks, | must
<END PAGE>
Fafnir lose,
For the mightier man
wast thou."
Regin had gone to a
<END PAGE>
distance while Sigurth
fought Fafnir, and
came back while Sigurth
was wiping the
blood from his sword.
Regin said:

<END PAGE>
23. "Hail to thee,
Sigurth! | Thou victory
hast,
And Fafnir in fight hast
slain;
Of all the men | who
<END PAGE>
tread the earth,
Most fearless art thou,
methinks."

Sigurth spake:
24. "Unknown it is, |
<END PAGE>
when all are together,
(The sons of the
glorious gods,)
Who bravest born shall
seem;
Some are valiant | who
<END PAGE>
redden no sword
In the blood of a
foeman's breast."

Regin spake:
25. "Glad art thou,
<END PAGE>
Sigurth, | of battle
gained,
As Gram with grass
thou cleansest;
My brother fierce | in
fight hast slain,
And somewhat I did
<END PAGE>
myself."

Sigurth spake:
26. "Afar didst thou go
| while Fafnir reddened
With his blood my blade
<END PAGE>
so keen;
With the might of the
dragon | my strength I
matched,
While thou in the
heather didst hide."
<END PAGE>
Regin spake:
27. "Longer wouldst
thou | in the heather
have let
Yon hoary giant hide,
Had the weapon availed
<END PAGE>
not | that once I
forged,
The keen-edged blade
thou didst bear."

Sigurth spake:
28. "Better is heart |
<END PAGE>
than a mighty blade
For him who shall
fiercely fight;
The brave man well |
shall fight and win,
Though dull his blade
<END PAGE>
may be.

29. "Brave men better |
than cowards be,
When the clash of
battle comes;
<END PAGE>
And better the glad |
than the gloomy man
Shall face what before
him lies.

<END PAGE>
30. "Thy rede it was |
that I should ride
Hither o'er mountains
high;
The glittering worm |
<END PAGE>
would have wealth and
life
If thou hadst not
mocked at my might."
Then Regin went up to
<END PAGE>
Fafnir and cut out his
heart with his sword,
that was named Rithil,
and then he
drank blood from the
wounds. Regin said:

<END PAGE>
31. "Sit now, Sigurth, |
for sleep will I,
Hold Fafnir's heart to
the fire;
For all his heart | shall
<END PAGE>
eaten be,
Since deep of blood I
have drunk."
Sigurth took Fafnir's
<END PAGE>
heart and cooked it on
a spit. When he thought
that it was fully
cooked, and the
blood foamed out of
the heart, then he
<END PAGE>
tried it with his finger
to see whether it was
fully cooked. He
burned his finger, and
put it in his mouth. But
when Fafnir's
<END PAGE>
heart's-blood came on
his tongue, he
understood the speech
of birds. He heard
nut-hatches chattering
in the thickets. A nut
<END PAGE>
hatch said:

32. "There sits Sigurth,
| sprinkled with blood,
And Fafnir's heart |
with fire he cooks;
<END PAGE>
Wise were the breaker
| of rings, I ween,
To eat the life-muscles
| all so bright."

<END PAGE>
A second spake:
33. "There Regin lies, |
and plans he lays
The youth to betray |
who trusts him well;
Lying words | with wiles
<END PAGE>
will he speak,
Till his brother the
maker | of mischief
avenges."

<END PAGE>
A third spake:
34. "Less by a head |
let the chatterer
hoary
Go from here to hell;
Then all of the wealth |
<END PAGE>
he alone can wield,
The gold that Fafnir
guarded."

A fourth spake:
35. "Wise would he seem
<END PAGE>
| if so he would heed
The counsel good | we
sisters give;
Thought he would give,
| and the ravens
gladden,
<END PAGE>
There is ever a wolf |
where his ears I spy."

A fifth spake:
36. "Less wise must be
<END PAGE>
| the tree of battle
Than to me would seem
| the leader of men,
If forth he lets | one
brother fare,
When he of the other |
<END PAGE>
the slayer is."

A sixth spake:
37. "Most foolish he
seems | if he shall
spare
<END PAGE>
His foe, the bane of
the folk,
There Regin lies, | who
hath wronged him so,
Yet falsehood knows
<END PAGE>
he not."

A seventh spake:
38. "Let the head from
the frost-cold | giant
be hewed,
<END PAGE>
And let him of rings be
robbed;
Then all the wealth |
which Fafnir's was
Shall belong to thee
<END PAGE>
alone."

Sigurth spake:
39. "Not so rich a fate
| shall Regin have
As the tale of my death
<END PAGE>
to tell;
For soon the brothers
| both shall die,
And hence to hell shall
go."
Sigurth hewed off
<END PAGE>
Regin's head, and then
he ate Fafnir's heart,
and drank the blood of
both Regin and
Fafnir. Then Sigurth
heard what the
nut-hatch said:

<END PAGE>
40. "Bind, Sigurth, the
golden | rings
together,
Not kingly is it | aught
to fear;
I know a maid, | there is
<END PAGE>
none so fair,
Rich in gold, | if thou
mightest get her.

41. "Green the paths |
that to Gjuki lead,
<END PAGE>
And his fate the way |
to the wanderer shows;
The doughty king | a
daughter has,
That thou as a bride |
<END PAGE>
mayst, Sigurth, buy."

Another spake:
42. "A hall stands high
| on Hindarfjoll,
All with flame | is it
<END PAGE>
ringed without;
Warriors wise | did
make it once
Out of the flaming |
light of the flood.

<END PAGE>
43. "On the mountain
sleeps | a battle-maid,
And about her plays |
the bane of the wood;
Ygg with the thorn |
<END PAGE>
hath smitten her thus,
For she felled the
fighter | he fain would
save.

<END PAGE>
44. "There mayst thou
behold | the maiden
helmed,
Who forth on
Vingskornir | rode from
<END PAGE>
the fight;
The victory-bringer |
her sleep shall break
not,
Thou heroes' son, | so
the Norns have set."
<END PAGE>
Sigurth rode along
Fafnir's trail to his
lair, and found it open.
The gate-posts were
of iron, and the gates;
of iron, too, were all
<END PAGE>
the beams in the house,
which was dug down
into the earth. There
Sigurth found a
mighty store of gold,
and he filled two
<END PAGE>
chests full thereof; he
took the fear-helm and
a golden mail-coat
and the sword Hrotti,
and many other
precious things, and
<END PAGE>
