HARBARTHSLJOTH
The Poem of Harbarth
<END PAGE>
1. "Who is the fellow
yonder, | on the
farther shore of the
sound?"

<END PAGE>
The ferryman spake:
2. "What kind of a
peasant is yon, | that
calls o'er the bay?"

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
3. "Ferry me over the
sound; | I will feed thee
therefor in the
morning;
A basket I have on my
<END PAGE>
back, | and food
therein, none better;
At leisure I ate, | ere
the house I left,
Of herrings and
porridge, | so plenty I
<END PAGE>
had."

The ferryman spake:
4. "Of thy morning
feats art thou proud, |
<END PAGE>
but the future thou
knowest not wholly;
Doleful thine
home-coming is: | thy
mother, me thinks, is
dead."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
5. "Now hast thou said |
what to each must seem
The mightiest grief, |
that my mother is
<END PAGE>
dead."

The ferryman spake:
6. "Three good
dwellings, | methinks,
thou hast not;
<END PAGE>
Barefoot thou
standest, | and wearest
a beggar's dress;
Not even hose dost
thou have."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
7. "Steer thou hither
the boat; | the landing
here shall I show thee;
But whose the craft |
<END PAGE>
that thou keepest on
the shore?"

The ferryman spake:
8. "Hildolf is he | who
bade me have it,
A hero wise; | his home
<END PAGE>
is at Rathsey's sound.
He bade me no robbers
to steer, | nor
stealers of steeds,
But worthy men, | and
<END PAGE>
those whom well do I
know.
Say now thy name, | if
over the sound thou
wilt fare."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
9. "My name indeed
shall I tell, | though in
danger I am,
And all my race; | I am
<END PAGE>
Othin's son,
Meili's brother, | and
Magni's father,
The strong one of the
gods; | with Thor now
speech canst thou get.
<END PAGE>
And now would I know |
what name thou hast."

The ferryman spake:
10. "Harbarth am I, |
<END PAGE>
and seldom I hide my
name."

Thor spake:
11. "Why shouldst thou
<END PAGE>
hide thy name, | if
quarrel thou hast
not?"

Harbarth spake:
12. "And though I had
<END PAGE>
a quarrel, | from such
as thou art
Yet none the less | my
life would I guard,
Unless I be doomed to
die."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
13. "Great trouble,
methinks, | would it be
to come to thee,
To wade the waters
<END PAGE>
across, | and wet my
middle;
Weakling, well shall I
pay | thy mocking
words,
if across the sound I
<END PAGE>
come."

Harbarth spake:
14. "Here shall I stand
| and await thee here;
Thou hast found since
<END PAGE>
Hrungnir died | no
fiercer man."

Thor spake:
15. "Fain art thou to
tell | how with Hrungnir
<END PAGE>
I fought,
The haughty giant, |
whose head of stone
was made;
And yet I felled him, |
<END PAGE>
and stretched him
before me.
What, Harbarth, didst
thou the while?"

Harbarth spake:
16. "Five full winters |
<END PAGE>
with Fjolvar was I,
And dwelt in the isle |
that is Algr√∂n called;
There could we fight, |
and fell the slain,
Much could we seek, |
<END PAGE>
and maids could
master."

Thor spake:
17. "How won ye
success with your
<END PAGE>
women?"

Harbarth spake:
18. "Lively women we
had, | if they wise for
us were;
<END PAGE>
Wise were the women we
had, | if they kind for
us were;
For ropes of sand |
they would seek to
<END PAGE>
wind,
And the bottom to dig |
from the deepest dale.
Wiser than all | in
counsel I was,
And there I slept | by
<END PAGE>
the sisters seven,
And joy full great | did
I get from each.
What, Thor, didst thou
the while?"

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
19. "Thjazi I felled, |
the giant fierce,
And I hurled the eyes |
of Alvaldi's son
To the heavens hot
<END PAGE>
above;
Of my deeds the
mightiest | marks are
these,
That all men since can
see.
<END PAGE>
What, Harbarth, didst
thou the while?"
Harbarth spoke:

20. "Much love-craft I
<END PAGE>
wrought | with them who
ride by night,
When I stole them by
stealth from their
husbands;
A giant hard | was
<END PAGE>
Hlebarth, methinks:
His wand he gave me as
gift,
And I stole his wits
away."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
21. "Thou didst repay
good gifts with evil
mind."

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
22. "The oak must have
| what it shaves from
another;
In such things each
<END PAGE>
for himself.
What, Thor, didst thou
the while?"

Thor spake:
23. "Eastward I fared, |
<END PAGE>
of the giants I felled
Their ill-working women
| who went to the
mountain;
And large were the
<END PAGE>
giants' throng | if all
were alive;
No men would there be
| in Mithgarth more.
What, Harbarth, didst
thou the while?"

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
24. "In Valland I was, |
and wars I raised,
Princes I angered, |
and peace brought
<END PAGE>
never;
The noble who fall | in
the fight hath Othin,
And Thor hath the
race of the thralls."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
25. "Unequal gifts | of
men wouldst thou give
to the gods,
If might too much thou
<END PAGE>
shouldst have."

Harbarth spake:
26. "Thor has might
enough, | but never a
heart;
<END PAGE>
For cowardly fear | in
a glove wast thou fain
to crawl,
And there forgot thou
wast Thor;
Afraid there thou wast,
<END PAGE>
| thy fear was such,
To fart or sneeze |
lest Fjalar should
hear."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
27. "Thou womanish
Harbarth, | to hell
would I smite thee
straight,
Could mine arm reach
<END PAGE>
over the sound."

Harbarth spake:
28. "Wherefore reach
over the sound, | since
strife we have none?
<END PAGE>
What, Thor, didst thou
do then?"

Thor spake:
29. "Eastward I was, |
<END PAGE>
and the river I
guarded well,
Where the sons of
Svarang | sought me
there;
Stones did they hurl; |
<END PAGE>
small joy did they have
of winning;
Before me there | to
ask for peace did they
fare.
What, Harbarth, didst
<END PAGE>
thou the while?"

Harbarth spake:
30. "Eastward I was, |
and spake with a
certain one,
<END PAGE>
I played with the
linen-white maid, | and
met her by stealth;
I gladdened the
gold-decked one, | and
<END PAGE>
she granted me joy."

Thor spake:
31. "Full fair was thy
woman-finding."

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
32. "Thy help did I
need then, Thor, | to
hold the white maid
fast."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
33. "Gladly, had I been
there, | my help to thee
had been given."

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
34. "I might have
trusted thee then, |
didst thou not betray
thy troth."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
35. "No heel-biter am I,
in truth, | like an old
leather shoe in
spring."
Harbarth spoke:
<END PAGE>
36. "What, Thor, didst
thou the while?"

Thor spake:
37. "In Hlesey the
<END PAGE>
brides | of the
Berserkers slew I;
Most evil they were, |
and all they betrayed."

Harbarth spake:
38, "Shame didst thou
<END PAGE>
win, | that women thou
slewest, Thor."

Thor spake:
39. "She-wolves they
were like, | and women
<END PAGE>
but little;
My ship, which well | I
had trimmed, did they
shake;
With clubs of iron they
<END PAGE>
threatened, | and
Thjalfi they drove off.
What, Harbarth, didst
thou the while?"

Harbarth spake:
40. "In the host I was |
<END PAGE>
that hither fared,
The banners to raise, |
and the spear to
redden."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
41. "Wilt thou now say |
that hatred thou
soughtest to bring
us?"

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
42. "A ring for thy
hand | shall make all
right for thee,
As the judge decides |
<END PAGE>
who sets us two at
peace."

Thor spake:
43. "Where foundest
thou | so foul and
<END PAGE>
scornful a speech?
More foul a speech | I
never before have
heard."

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
44. "I learned it from
men, | the men so old,
Who dwell in the hills of
home."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
45. "A name full good |
to heaps of stones
thou givest
When thou callest them
<END PAGE>
hills of home."

Harbarth spake:
46. "Of such things
speak I so."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
47. "Ill for thee comes
| thy keenness of
tongue,
If the water I choose
<END PAGE>
to wade;
Louder, I ween, | than a
wolf thou cryest,
If a blow of my hammer
thou hast."

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
48. "Sif has a lover at
home, | and him
shouldst thou meet;
More fitting it were | on
<END PAGE>
him to put forth thy
strength."

Thor spake:
49. "Thy tongue still
makes thee say | what
<END PAGE>
seems most ill to me,
Thou witless man! Thou
liest, I ween."

Harbarth spake:
50. "Truth do I speak, |
<END PAGE>
but slow on thy way
thou art;
Far hadst thou gone |
if now in the boat thou
hadst fared."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
51. "Thou womanish
Harbarth! | here hast
thou held me too long."

<END PAGE>
Harbarth spake:
52. "I thought not ever
| that Asathor would be
hindered
By a ferryman thus
<END PAGE>
from faring."

Thor spake:
53. "One counsel I
bring thee now: | row
hither thy boat;
<END PAGE>
No more of scoffing; |
set Magni's father
across."

Harbarth spake:
54. "From the sound go
<END PAGE>
hence; | the passage
thou hast not."

Thor spake:
55. "The way now show
me, since thou takest
<END PAGE>
me not o'er the water."

Harbarth spake:
56. "To refuse it is
little, to fare it is long;
A while to the stock,
<END PAGE>
and a while to the
stone;
Then the road to thy
left, till Verland thou
reachest;
And there shall
<END PAGE>
Fjorgyn her son Thor
find,
And the road of her
children she shows him
to Othin's realm."

<END PAGE>
Thor spake:
57. "May I come so far
in a day?"

Harbarth spake:
58. "With toil and
<END PAGE>
trouble perchance,
While the sun still
shines, or so I think."

Thor spake:
59. "Short now shall be
<END PAGE>
our speech, for thou
speakest in mockery
only;
The passage thou
gavest me not I shall
pay thee if ever we
meet."
<END PAGE>
