HELGAKVITHA HUNDINGSBANA II
The Second Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane
<END PAGE>
1. "Say to Hæming | that
Helgi knows
Whom the heroes | in
armor hid;
A gray wolf had they |
within their hall,
Whom King Hunding |
Hamal thought."
Hamal was the name of
Hagal's son. King
Hunding
<END PAGE>
sent men to Hagal to
seek Helgi, and Helgi
could not save himself
in any other way, so he
put on the
clothes of a
bond-woman and set to
work at the mill. They
sought Helgi but found
him not.

<END PAGE>
2. Then Blind spake out,
| the evil-minded:
 Of Hagal's
bond-woman | bright
are the eyes;
Yon comes not of
churls | who stands at
the quern;
The millstones break, |
the boards are
shattered.
<END PAGE>
3. The hero has | a
doom full hard,
That barley now | he
needs must grind;
Better befits | his hand
to feel
The hilt of the sword |
than the millstone's
handle."
Hagal answered and
said:
<END PAGE>
4. "Small is the wonder
| if boards are
splintered
By a monarch's
daughter | the mill is
turned;
Once through clouds |
she was wont to ride,
And battles fought |
like fighting men,
(Till Helgi a captive |
held her fast;
<END PAGE>
Sister she is | of Sigar
and Hogni,
Thus bright are the
eyes | of the Ylfings'
maid.)"
Helgi escaped and went
to a fighting ship. He
slew King Hunding, and
thenceforth was called
Helgi
Hundingsbane.
<END PAGE>
(II)
He lay with his host in
Brunavagar, and they
had there a
strand-slaughtering,
and ate the flesh raw.
Hogni
was the name of a king.
His daughter was
Sigrun; she was a
Valkyrie and rode air
and water; she was
<END PAGE>
Svava reborn. Sigrun
rode to Helgi's ship
and said:

5. "Who rules the ship |
by the shore so
steep?
Where is the home | ye
warriors have?
Why do ye bide | in
Brunavagar,
<END PAGE>
Or what the way | that
ye wish to try?"

Helgi spake:
6 "Hamal's the ship | by
the shore so steep,
Our home in Hlesey | do
we have;
For fair wind bide we |
in Brunavagar,
Eastward the way | that
we wish to try."
<END PAGE>
Sigrun spake:
7. "Where hast thou,
warrior, | battle
wakened,
Or gorged the birds |
of the sisters of Guth?
Why is thy byrnie |
spattered with blood,
Why helmed dost feast |
on food uncooked?"

<END PAGE>
Helgi spake:
8. "Latest of all, | the
Ylfings' son
On the western sea, | if
know thou wilt,
Captured bears | in
Bragalund,
And fed the eagles |
with edge of sword.
Now is it shown | why
our shirts are bloody,
<END PAGE>
And little our food |
with fire is cooked."

Sigrun spake:
9. "Of battle thou
tellest, | and there was
bent
Hunding the king |
before Helgi down;
There was carnage
when thou | didst
avenge thy kin,
<END PAGE>
And blood flowed fast |
on the blade of the
sword."

Helgi spake:
10. "How didst thou
know | that now our kin,
Maiden wise, | we have
well avenged?
Many there are | of
the sons of the mighty
<END PAGE>
Who share alike | our
lofty race."

Sigrun spake:
11. "Not far was I |
from the lord of the
folk,
Yester morn, | when the
monarch was slain;
Though crafty the son
| of Sigmund, methinks,
<END PAGE>
When he speaks of the
fight | in
slaughter-runes.

12. "On the long-ship
once | I saw thee well,
When in the
blood-stained | bow
thou wast,
(And round thee icy |
waves were raging;)
<END PAGE>
Now would the hero |
hide from me,
But to Hogni's
daughter | is Helgi
known."
(III)
Granmar was the name
of a mighty king, who
dwelt at Svarin's hill.
He had many sons; one
was named
<END PAGE>
Hothbrodd, another
Gothmund, a third
Starkath. Hothbrodd
was in a kings' meeting,
and he won the
promise of having
Sigrun, Hogni's
daughter, for his wife.
But when she heard
this, she rode with the
Valkyries over air and
sea to seek Helgi. Helgi
was then at Logafjoll,
and had fought with
Hunding's
<END PAGE>
sons; there he killed
Alf and Eyolf,
Hjorvarth and
Hervarth. He was all
weary with battle, and
sat under
the eagle-stone. There
Sigrun found him, and
ran to throw her arms
about his neck, and
kissed him, and
<END PAGE>
told him her tidings, as
is set forth in the old
Volsung lay:

13. Sigrun the joyful |
chieftain sought,
Forthwith Helgi's | hand
she took;
She greeted the hero |
helmed and kissed him,
The warrior's heart |
to the woman turned.
<END PAGE>
14. From her heart the
daughter | of Hogni
spake,
Dear was Helgi, | she
said, to her;
Long with all | my heart
I loved
Sigmund's son | ere
ever I saw him.

<END PAGE>
15. At the meeting to
Hothbrodd | mated I
was,
But another hero | I
fain would have;
Though, king, the wrath
| of my kin I fear,
Since I broke my
father's | fairest wish."

<END PAGE>
Helgi spake:
16. "Fear not ever |
Hogni's anger,
Nor yet thy kinsmen's |
cruel wrath;
Maiden, thou | with me
shalt live,
Thy kindred, fair one, |
I shall not fear."
(IV)
Helgi then assembled a
great sea-host and
went to Frekastein. On
the sea he met a
perilous storm;
<END PAGE>
lightning flashed
overhead and the
bolts struck the ship.
They saw in the air
that nine Valkyries
were
riding, and recognized
Sigrun among them.
Then the storm abated,
and they came safe
and sound to land.
<END PAGE>
Granmar's sons sat on
a certain mountain as
the ships sailed toward
the land. Gothmund
leaped on a
horse and rode for
news to a promontory
near the harbor; the
Volsungs were even
then lowering their
sails. Then Gothmund
said, as is written
before in the Helgi lay:
<END PAGE>
Who is the king | who
captains the fleet,
And to the land | the
warriors leads?
Sinfjotli, Sigmund's son,
answered him, and that
too is written.
Gothmund rode home
with his tidings of the
host;
then Granmar's sons
summoned an army.
Many kings came there;
there were Hogni,
Sigrun's father, and
<END PAGE>
his sons Bragi and Dag.
There was a great
battle, and all
Granmar's sons were
slain and all their
allies;
only Dag, Hogni's son,
was spared, and he
swore loyalty to the
Volsungs. Sigrun went
among the dead
<END PAGE>
and found Hothbrodd
at the coming of death.
She said:

17. "Never shall Sigrun
| from Sevafjoll,
Hothbrodd king, | be
held in thine arms;
Granmar's sons | full
cold have grown,
And the giant-steeds
gray | on corpses
gorge."
<END PAGE>
Then she sought out
Helgi, and was full of
joy He said:

18. "Maid, not fair | is
all thy fortune,
The Norris I blame |
that this should be;
This morn there fell |
at Frekastein
Bragi and Hogni |
beneath my hand.
<END PAGE>
19. "At Hlebjorg fell |
the sons of Hrollaug,
Starkath the king | at
Styrkleifar;
Fighters more noble |
saw I never,
The body fought | when
the head had fallen.

<END PAGE>
20. "On the ground full
low | the slain are
lying,
Most are there | of the
men of thy race;
Nought hast thou won, |
for thy fate it was
Brave men to bring | to
the battle-field."
Then Sigrun wept. |
Helgi said:
<END PAGE>
21. "Grieve not, Sigrun,
| the battle is gained,
The fighter can shun
not his fate."

Sigrun spake:
To life would I call |
them who slaughtered
lie,
If safe on thy breast I
might be.
<END PAGE>
(V)
This Gothmund the son
of Granmar spoke:

22. "What hero great |
is guiding the ships?
A golden flag | on the
stem he flies;
I find not peace in |
the van of your faring,
And round the fighters
| is battle-light red."
<END PAGE>
Sinfjotli spake:
23. "Here may
Hothbrodd | Helgi find,
The hater of flight, | in
the midst of the fleet;
The home of all | thy
race he has,
And over the realm | of
the fishes he rules."

<END PAGE>
Gothmund spake:
24. "First shall swords
| at Frekastein
Prove our worth | in
place of words;
Time is it, Hothbrodd, |
vengeance to have,
If in battle worsted |
once we were."

<END PAGE>
Sinfjotli spake:
25. "Better, Gothmund, |
to tend the goats,
And climb the rocks |
of the mountain cliffs;
A hazel switch | to hold
in thy hand
More seemly were |
than the hilt of a
sword."

<END PAGE>
Helgi spake:
26. "Better, Sinfjotli, |
thee 'twould beseem
Battles to give, | and
eagles to gladden,
Than vain and empty |
speech to utter,
Though warriors oft |
with words do strive.

<END PAGE>
27. "Good I find not |
the sons of Granmar,
But for heroes 'tis
seemly | the truth to
speak;
At Moinsheimar | proved
the men
That hearts for the
wielding | of swords
they had,
(And ever brave | the
warriors are.)"
<END PAGE>
(VI)
Helgi took Sigrun to
wife, and they had
sons. Helgi did not
reach old age. Dag, the
son of Hogni, offered
sacrifice to Othin to be
avenged for his
father's death; Othin
gave Dag his spear.
Dag found Helgi, his
<END PAGE>
brother-in-law, at a
place which is called
Fjoturlund. He thrust
the spear through
Helgi's body. Then
Helgi fell, and Dag rode
to Sevafjoll and told
Sigrun the tidings:

<END PAGE>
28. "Sad am I, sister, |
sorrow to tell thee,
Woe to my kin | unwilling
I worked;
In the morn there fell |
at Fjoturlund
The noblest prince |
the world has known,
(And his heel he set |
on the heroes'
necks.)"
<END PAGE>
Sigrun spake:
29. "Now may every |
oath thee bite
That with Helgi | sworn
thou hast,
By the water | bright
of Leipt,
And the ice-cold |
stone of Uth.

<END PAGE>
30. "The ship shall sail
not | in which thou
sailest,
Though a favoring wind
| shall follow after;
The horse shall run
not | whereon thou
ridest,
Though fain thou art |
thy foe to flee.

<END PAGE>
31. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
The sword shall bite
not | which thou
bearest,
Till thy head itself | it
sings about.

32. Vengeance were
mine | for Helgi's
murder,
<END PAGE>
Wert thou a wolf | in
the woods without,
Possessing nought |
and knowing no joy,
Having no food | save
corpses to feed on."

Dag spake:
33. "Mad art thou,
sister, | and wild of
mind,
<END PAGE>
Such a curse | on thy
brother to cast;
Othin is ruler | of
every ill,
Who sunders kin | with
runes of spite.

34. "Thy brother rings
| so red will give thee,
All Vandilsve | and
Vigdalir;
<END PAGE>
Take half my land | to
pay the harm,
Ring-decked maid, | and
as meed for thy sons."

Sigrun spake:
35. "I shall sit not
happy | at Sevafjoll,
Early or late, | my life
to love,
If the light cannot
show, | in the leader's
band,
<END PAGE>
Vigblær bearing him |
back to his home,
(The golden-bitted; | I
shall greet him never.)

36. "Such the fear |
that Helgi's foes
Ever felt, | and all
their kin,
As makes the goats |
with terror mad
<END PAGE>
Run from the wolf |
among the rocks.

37. "Helgi rose | above
heroes all
Like the lofty ash |
above lowly thorns,
Or the noble stag, |
with dew besprinkled,
Bearing his head |
above all beasts,
<END PAGE>
(And his horns gleam
bright | to heaven
itself.)
A hill was made in
Helgi's memory. And
when he
came to Valhall, then
Othin bade him rule
over every thing with
himself.
(VII)
<END PAGE>
Helgi said:
A "Thou shalt, Hunding,
| of every hero
Wash the feet, | and
kindle the fire,
Tie up dogs, | and tend
the horses,
And feed the swine |
ere to sleep thou
goest."
(VIII)
<END PAGE>
One of Sigrun's
maidens went one
evening to Helgi's hill,
and saw that Helgi
rode to the hill with
many
men, The maiden said:

39. "Is this a dream |
that methinks I see,
Or the doom of the
gods, | that dead men
ride,
<END PAGE>
And hither spurring |
urge your steeds,
Or is home-coming now |
to the heroes
granted?"

Helgi spake:
40. "No dream is this |
that thou thinkest to
see,
Nor the end of the
world, | though us thou
beholdest,
<END PAGE>
And hither spurring |
we urge our steeds,
Nor is home-coming now
| to the heroes
granted."
The maiden went home
and said to Sigrun:

41. "Go forth, Sigrun, |
from Sevafjoll,
If fain the lord | of the
folk wouldst find;
<END PAGE>
(The hill is open, | Helgi
is come;)
The sword-tracks
bleed; | the monarch
bade
That thou his wounds |
shouldst now make
well."
Sigrun went in the hill
to Helgi, and said:

<END PAGE>
42. "Now am I glad | of
our meeting together,
As Othin's hawks, | so
eager for prey,
When slaughter and
flesh | all warm they
scent,
Or dew-wet see | the
red of day.

<END PAGE>
43. "First will I kiss |
the lifeless king,
Ere off the bloody |
byrnie thou cast;
With frost thy hair | is
heavy, Helgi,
And damp thou art |
with the dew of death;
(Ice-cold hands | has
Hogni's kinsman,
What, prince, can I | to
bring thee ease?)"
<END PAGE>
Helgi spake:
44. "Thou alone, Sigrun
| of Sevafjoll,
Art cause that Helgi |
with dew is heavy;
Gold-decked maid, | thy
tears are grievous,
(Sun-bright
south-maid, | ere thou
sleepest;)
Each falls like blood |
on the hero's breast,
<END PAGE>
(Burned-out, cold, |
and crushed with
care.)

45. "Well shall we drink
| a noble draught,
Though love and lands
| are lost to me;
No man a song | of
sorrow shall sing,
Though bleeding
wounds | are on my
breast;
<END PAGE>
Now in the hill | our
brides we hold,
The heroes' loves, | by
their husbands dead."
Sigrun made ready a
bed in the hill.

46. "Here a bed | I
have made for thee,
Helgi,
To rest thee from
care, | thou kin of the
Ylfings;
<END PAGE>
I will make thee sink | to
sleep in my arms,
As once I lay | with the
living king."

Helgi spake:
47. "Now do I say | that
in Sevafjoll
Aught may happen, |
early or late,
Since thou sleepest
clasped | in a corpse's
arms,
<END PAGE>
So fair in the hill, | the
daughter of Hogni!
(Living thou comest, | a
daughter of kings.)

48. "Now must I ride |
the reddened ways,
And my bay steed set |
to tread the sky;
Westward I go | to
wind-helm's bridges,
<END PAGE>
Ere Salgofnir wakes |
the warrior throng."
Then Helgi and his
followers rode on
their way, and
the women went home to
the dwelling. Another
evening Sigrun bade
the maiden keep watch
at the hill.
And at sunset when
Sigrun came to the hill
she said:
<END PAGE>
49. "Now were he come,
| if come he might,
Sigmund's son, | from
Othin's seat;
Hope grows dim | of the
hero's return
When eagles sit | on
the ash-tree boughs,
And men are seeking |
the meeting of dreams."
The Maiden said:
<END PAGE>
50. "Mad thou wouldst
seem | alone to seek,
Daughter of heroes, |
the house of the dead;
For mightier now | at
night are all
The ghosts of the
dead | than when day is
bright."
Sigrun was early dead
of sorrow and grief. It
was believed in olden
times that people were
born again,
<END PAGE>
but that is now called
old wives' folly. Of
Helgi and Sigrun it is
said that they were
born again; he
became Helgi
Haddingjaskati, and
she Kara the daughter
of Halfdan, as is told in
the Lay of Kara, and
she was a Valkyrie.
<END PAGE>
