REGINSMOL
The Ballad of Regin
<END PAGE>
1. "What is the fish |
that runs in the flood,
And itself from ill
cannot save?
If thy head thou
<END PAGE>
wouldst | from hell
redeem,
Find me the water's
flame."

Andvari spake:
2. "Andvari am I, | and
<END PAGE>
Oin my father,
In many a fall have I
fared;
An evil Norn | in olden
days
Doomed me In waters to
<END PAGE>
dwell."

Loki spake:
3. "Andvari, say, | if
thou seekest still
To live in the land of
<END PAGE>
men,
What payment is set |
for the sons of men
Who war with lying
words?"

<END PAGE>
Andvari spake:
4. "A mighty payment |
the men must make
Who in Valthgelmir's
waters wade;
On a long road lead |
<END PAGE>
the lying words
That one to another
utters."
Loki saw all the gold
that Andvari had. But
when
<END PAGE>
he had brought forth
all the gold, he held
back one ring, and Loki
took this from him. The
dwarf went
into his rocky hole and
<END PAGE>
said:

5. "Now shall the gold |
that Gust once had
Bring their death | to
brothers twain,
<END PAGE>
And evil be | for
heroes eight;
joy of my wealth | shall
no man win."
The gods gave
<END PAGE>
Hreithmar the gold, and
filled up the otter-skin,
and stood it on its
feet. Then the gods
had
to heap up gold and
<END PAGE>
hide it. And when that
was done, Hreithmar
came forward and saw
a single whisker,
and bade them cover it.
Then Othin brought out
<END PAGE>
the ring Andvaranaut
and covered the hair.
Then Loki
said:

6. "The gold is given, |
and great the price
<END PAGE>
Thou hast my head to
save;
But fortune thy sons |
shall find not there,
The bane of ye both it
<END PAGE>
is."

Hreithmar spake:
7. "Gifts ye gave, | but
ye gave not kindly,
Gave not with hearts
<END PAGE>
that were whole;
Your lives ere this |
should ye all have lost,
If sooner this fate I
had seen."

<END PAGE>
Loki spake:
8. "Worse is this | that
methinks I see,
For a maid shall
kinsmen clash;
Heroes unborn |
<END PAGE>
thereby shall be,
I deem, to hatred
doomed."

Hreithmar spake:
9. "The gold so red |
<END PAGE>
shall I rule, methinks,
So long as I shall live;
Nought of fear | for
thy threats I feel,
So get ye hence to
your homes."
<END PAGE>
Fafnir and Regin asked
Hreithmar for a share
of the wealth that was
paid for the slaying of
their brother,
Otr. This he refused,
<END PAGE>
and Fafnir thrust his
sword through the
body of his father,
Hreithmar, while he was
sleeping. Hreithmar
called to his
<END PAGE>
daughters:

10. "Lyngheith and
Lofnheith, | fled is my
life,
And mighty now is my
<END PAGE>
need!"

Lyngheith spake:
Though a sister loses |
her father, seldom
Revenge on her
<END PAGE>
brother she brings.

Hreithmar spake:
11. "A daughter, woman
| with wolf's heart,
bear,
<END PAGE>
If thou hast no son |
with the hero brave;
If one weds the maid, |
for the need is mighty,
Their son for thy hurt
<END PAGE>
| may vengeance seek."
Then Hreithmar died,
and Fafnir took all the
gold. Thereupon Regin
asked to have his
inheritance from
<END PAGE>
his father, but Fafnir
refused this. Then
Regin asked counsel
of Lyngheith, his
<END PAGE>
sister, how he should
win his inheritance. She
said:

12. "In friendly wise |
the wealth shalt thou
ask
<END PAGE>
Of thy brother, and
better will;
Not seemly is it | to
seek with the sword
Fafnir's treasure to
<END PAGE>
take."
All these happenings
did Regin tell to
Sigurth.
One day, when he came
<END PAGE>
to Regin's house, he
was gladly welcomed.
Regin said:

13. "Hither the son | of
Sigmund is come,
The hero eager, | here
<END PAGE>
to our hall;
His courage is more |
than an ancient man's,
And battle I hope |
from the hardy wolf.

<END PAGE>
14. "Here shall I
foster | the fearless
prince,
Now Yngvi's heir | to us
is come;
The noblest hero |
<END PAGE>
beneath the sun,
The threads of his
fate | all lands enfold."
Sigurth was there
<END PAGE>
continually with Regin,
who said to Sigurth
that Fafnir lay at
Gnitaheith, and was in
the shape of a dragon.
He had a fear-helm, of
<END PAGE>
which all living
creatures were
terrified. Regin made
Sigurth the sword
which was called Gram;
it was so sharp that
<END PAGE>
when he thrust it down
into the Rhine, and
let a strand of wool
drift against it with the
stream, it cleft the
strand asunder as if it
<END PAGE>
were water. With this
sword Sigurth cleft
asunder Regin's anvil.
After that Regin egged
Sigurth on to slay
Fafnir, but he said:
<END PAGE>
15. "Loud will the sons
| of Hunding laugh,
Who low did Eylimi | lay
in death,
If the hero sooner |
<END PAGE>
seeks the red
Rings to find | than his
father's vengeance."
King Hjalprek gave
Sigurth a fleet for the
avenging
<END PAGE>
of his father. They ran
into a great storm, and
were off a certain
headland. A man stood
on the mountain,
and said:
<END PAGE>
16. "Who yonder rides |
on RÃ¦vil's steeds,
O'er towering waves |
and waters wild?
The sail-horses all |
<END PAGE>
with sweat are dripping,
Nor can the
sea-steeds | the gale
withstand."
Regin answered:

<END PAGE>
17. "On the sea-trees
here | are Sigurth and
I,
The storm wind drives
us | on to our death;
The waves crash down
<END PAGE>
| on the forward deck,
And the roller-steeds
sink; | who seeks our
names?"

<END PAGE>
The Man spake:
18. "Hnikar I was | when
Volsung once
Gladdened the ravens |
and battle gave;
Call me the Man | from
<END PAGE>
the Mountain now,
Feng or Fjolnir; | with
you will I fare."

They sailed to the land,
<END PAGE>
and the man went on
board the ship, and the
storm subsided. Sigurth
spake:
19. "Hnikar, say, | for
thou seest the fate
That to gods and men
<END PAGE>
is given;
What sign is fairest |
for him who fights,
And best for the
swinging of swords?"

<END PAGE>
Hnikar spake:
20. "Many the signs, | if
men but knew,
That are good for the
swinging of swords;
It is well, methinks, | if
<END PAGE>
the warrior meets
A raven black on his
road.

21. "Another it is | if
out thou art come,
<END PAGE>
And art ready forth to
fare,
To behold on the path |
before thy house
Two fighters greedy of
<END PAGE>
fame.

22. "Third it is well | if
a howling wolf
Thou hearest under
the ash;
<END PAGE>
And fortune comes | if
thy foe thou seest
Ere thee the hero
beholds.

<END PAGE>
23. "A man shall fight
not | when he must
face
The moon's bright
sister setting late;
Win he shall | who well
<END PAGE>
can see,
And wedge-like forms |
his men for the fray.

24. "Foul is the sign | if
thy foot shall stumble
<END PAGE>
As thou goest forth to
fight;
Goddesses baneful | at
both thy sides
Will that wounds thou
<END PAGE>
shalt get.

25. "Combed and
washed | shall the wise
man go,
And a meal at mom shall
<END PAGE>
take;
For unknown it is |
where at eve he may
be;
It is ill thy luck to
lose."
<END PAGE>
Sigurth had a great
battle with Lyngvi, the
son of
Hunding, and his
<END PAGE>
brothers; there Lyngvi
fell, and his two
brothers with him.
After the battle Regin
said:

26. "Now the bloody
<END PAGE>
eagle | with biting
sword
Is carved on the back
| of Sigmund's killer;
Few were more fierce |
in fight than his son,
Who reddened the
<END PAGE>
earth | and gladdened
the ravens."
Sigurth went home to
Hjalprek's house;
thereupon Regin egged
him on to fight with
<END PAGE>
