SIGRDRIFUMOL
The Ballad of The Victory-Bringer
<END PAGE>
1. "What bit through
the byrnie? | how was
broken my sleep?
Who made me free | of
the fetters pale?"
He answered:
<END PAGE>
Sigmund's son, | with
Sigurth's sword,
That late with flesh |
hath fed the ravens.
Sigurth sat beside her
<END PAGE>
and asked her name.
She took a horn full of
mead and gave him a
memory-draught.

2. "Hail, day! | Hail, sons
of day!
<END PAGE>
And night and her
daughter now!
Look on us here | with
loving eyes,
That waiting we victory
<END PAGE>
win.

3. "Hail to the gods! |
Ye goddesses, hail,
And all the generous
earth!
<END PAGE>
Give to us wisdom | and
goodly speech,
And healing hands,
life-long.

<END PAGE>
4. "Long did I sleep, |
my slumber was long,
And long are the
griefs of life;
Othin decreed | that I
<END PAGE>
could not break
The heavy spells of
sleep."
Her name was
<END PAGE>
Sigrdrifa, and she was
a Valkyrie. She said
that two kings fought in
battle; one was called
Hjalmgunnar, an old
man but a mighty
<END PAGE>
warrior, and Othin had
promised him the
victory, and
The other was Agnar, |
brother of Autha,
None he found | who
fain would shield him.
<END PAGE>
Sigrdrifa, slew
Hjalmgunnar in the
battle, and Othin
pricked her with the
sleep-thorn in
<END PAGE>
punishment for
this, and said that she
should never
thereafter win victory
in battle, but that she
<END PAGE>
should be wedded. "And
I
said to him that I had
made a vow in my turn,
that I would
never marry a man who
<END PAGE>
knew the meaning of
fear." Sigurth
answered and asked
her to teach him
wisdom, if she knew of
what took place in all
the worlds. Sigrdrifa
<END PAGE>
said:

5. "Beer I bring thee, |
tree of battle,
Mingled of strength |
and mighty fame;
<END PAGE>
Charms it holds | and
healing signs,
Spells full good, | and
gladness-runes."
* * * * * *

<END PAGE>
6. Winning-runes learn,
| if thou longest to win,
And the runes on thy
sword-hilt write;
Some on the furrow, |
<END PAGE>
and some on the flat,
And twice shalt thou
call on Tyr.

7. Ale-runes learn, |
that with lies the wife
<END PAGE>
Of another betray not
thy trust;
On the horn thou shalt
write, | and the backs
of thy hands,
And Need shalt mark on
<END PAGE>
thy nails.
Thou shalt bless the
draught, | and danger
escape,
And cast a leek in the
cup;
<END PAGE>
(For so I know | thou
never shalt see
Thy mead with evil
mixed.)

<END PAGE>
8. Birth-runes learn, |
if help thou wilt lend,
The babe from the
mother to bring;
On thy palms shalt
<END PAGE>
write them, | and round
thy joints,
And ask the fates to
aid.

9. Wave-runes learn, |
<END PAGE>
if well thou wouldst
shelter
The sail-steeds out on
the sea;
On the stem shalt thou
write, | and the
<END PAGE>
steering blade,
And burn them into the
oars;
Though high be the
breakers, | and black
the waves,
<END PAGE>
Thou shalt safe the
harbor seek.

10. Branch-runes
learn, | if a healer
<END PAGE>
wouldst be,
And cure for wounds
wouldst work;
On the bark shalt thou
write, | and on trees
that be
<END PAGE>
With boughs to the
eastward bent.

11. Speech-runes
learn, | that none may
<END PAGE>
seek
To answer harm with
hate;
Well he winds | and
weaves them all,
And sets them side by
<END PAGE>
side,
At the judgment-place,
| when justice there
The folk shall fairly
win.

<END PAGE>
12. Thought-runes
learn, | if all shall think
Thou art keenest
minded of men.
* * * * * *

<END PAGE>
13. Them Hropt
arranged, | and them
he wrote,
And them in thought he
made,
Out of the draught |
<END PAGE>
that down had dropped
From the head of
Heithdraupnir,
And the horn of
Hoddrofnir.

<END PAGE>
14. On the mountain he
stood | with Brimir's
sword,
On his head the helm
he bore;
Then first the head |
<END PAGE>
of Mim spoke forth,
And words of truth it
told.
* * * * * *

<END PAGE>
15. He bade write on
the shield | before the
shining goddess,
On Arvak's ear, | and
on Alsvith's hoof,
On the wheel of the
<END PAGE>
car | of Hrungnir's
killer,
On Sleipnir's teeth, |
and the straps of the
sledge.

<END PAGE>
16. On the paws of the
bear, | and on Bragi's
tongue,
On the wolf's claws
bared, | and the
<END PAGE>
eagle's beak,
On bloody wings, | and
bridge's end,
On freeing hands | and
helping foot-prints.

<END PAGE>
17. On glass and on
gold, | and on goodly
charms,
In wine and in beer, |
and on well-loved
<END PAGE>
seats,
On Gungnir's point, |
and on Grani's breast,
On the nails of Norns, |
and the night-owl's
beak.
<END PAGE>
* * * * * *

18. Shaved off were
the runes | that of old
were written,
And mixed with the holy
<END PAGE>
mead,
And sent on ways so
wide;
So the gods had them, |
so the elves got them,
And some for the
<END PAGE>
Wanes so wise,
And some for mortal
men.

19. Beech-runes are
<END PAGE>
there, | birth-runes
are there,
And all the runes of
ale,
And the magic runes of
might;
Who knows them rightly
<END PAGE>
| and reads them true,
Has them himself to
help;
Ever they aid,
Till the gods are gone.
* * * * * *
<END PAGE>
Brynhild spake:
20. "Now shalt thou
choose, | for the
choice is given,
Thou tree of the biting
<END PAGE>
blade;
Speech or silence, | 'tis
thine to say,
Our evil is destined
all."

<END PAGE>
Sigurth spake:
21. "I shall not flee, |
though my fate be
near,
I was born not a
<END PAGE>
coward to be;
Thy loving word | for
mine will I win,
As long as I shall live."

<END PAGE>
22. Then first I rede
thee, | that free of
guilt
Toward kinsmen ever
thou art;
No vengeance have, |
<END PAGE>
though they work thee
harm,
Reward after death
thou shalt win.

23. Then second I rede
<END PAGE>
thee, | to swear no
oath
If true thou knowest it
not;
Bitter the fate | of the
breaker of troth,
And poor is the wolf of
<END PAGE>
his word.

24. Then third I rede
thee, | that thou at the
Thing
Shalt fight not in words
<END PAGE>
with fools;
For the man unwise | a
worser word
Than he thinks doth
utter oft.

<END PAGE>
25. Ill it is | if silent
thou art,
A coward born men call
thee,
And truth mayhap they
<END PAGE>
tell;
Seldom safe is fame,
Unless wide renown be
won;
On the day thereafter
| send him to death,
<END PAGE>
Let him pay the price
of his lies.

26. Then fourth I rede
thee, | if thou shalt
<END PAGE>
find
A wily witch on thy
road,
It is better to go | than
her guest to be,
Though night enfold
<END PAGE>
thee fast.

27. Eyes that see |
need the sons of men
Who fight in battle
fierce;
<END PAGE>
Oft witches evil | sit by
the way,
Who blade and courage
blunt.

<END PAGE>
28. Then fifth I rede
thee, | though maidens
fair
Thou seest on benches
sitting,
Let the silver of
<END PAGE>
kinship | not rob thee
of sleep,
And the kissing of
women beware.

29. Then sixth I rede
<END PAGE>
thee, | if men shall
wrangle,
And ale-talk rise to
wrath,
No words with a
drunken | warrior
<END PAGE>
have,
For wine steals many
men's wits.

30. Brawls and ale |
full oft have been
<END PAGE>
An ill to many a man,
Death for some, | and
sorrow for some;
Full many the woes of
men.

<END PAGE>
31. Then seventh I
rede thee, | if battle
thou seekest
With a foe that is full
of might;
It is better to fight |
<END PAGE>
than to burn alive
In the hall of the hero
rich.

32. Then eighth I rede
<END PAGE>
thee, | that evil thou
shun,
And beware of lying
words;
Take not a maid, | nor
the wife of a man,
Nor lure them on to
<END PAGE>
lust.

33. Then ninth I rede
thee: | burial render
If thou findest a fallen
corpse,
<END PAGE>
Of sickness dead, | or
dead in the sea,
Or dead of weapons'
wounds.

<END PAGE>
34. A bath shalt thou
give them | who
corpses be,
And hands and head
shalt wash;
Wipe them and comb, |
<END PAGE>
ere they go in the
coffin,
And pray that they
sleep in peace.

35. Then tenth I rede
<END PAGE>
thee, | that never thou
trust
The word of the race
of wolves,
(If his brother thou
broughtest to death,
Or his father thou
<END PAGE>
didst fell;)
Often a wolf | in a son
there is,
Though gold he gladly
takes.

<END PAGE>
36. Battle and hate |
and harm, methinks,
Full seldom fall asleep;
Wits and weapons | the
warrior needs
If boldest of men he
<END PAGE>
would be.

37. Then eleventh I
rede thee, | that wrath
thou shun,
And treachery false
<END PAGE>
