VAFTHRUTHNISMOL
The Ballad of Vafthruthnir
<END PAGE>
1. "Counsel me, Frigg,
for I long to fare,
And Vafthruthnir fain
would find;
fit wisdom old with the
giant wise
Myself would I seek to
match."

<END PAGE>
Frigg spake:
2. "Heerfather here at
home would I keep,
Where the gods
together dwell;
Amid all the giants an
equal in might
To Vafthruthnir know I
none."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
3. "Much have I fared,
much have I found.
Much have I got from
the gods;
And fain would I know
how Vafthruthnir now
Lives in his lofty hall."

<END PAGE>
Frigg spake:
4. "Safe mayst thou go,
safe come again,
And safe be the way
thou wendest!
Father of men, let thy
mind be keen
When speech with the
giant thou seekest."

<END PAGE>
5. The wisdom then of
the giant wise
Forth did he fare to
try;
He found the hall | of
the father of Im,
And in forthwith went
Ygg.

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
6. "Vafthruthnir, hail! |
to thy hall am I come,
For thyself I fain
would see;
And first would I ask |
if wise thou art,
Or, giant, all wisdom
hast won."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
7. "Who is the man |
that speaks to me,
Here in my lofty hall?
Forth from our
dwelling | thou never
shalt fare,
Unless wiser than I
thou art."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
8. "Gagnrath they call
me, | and thirsty I come
From a journey hard
to thy hall;
Welcome I look for, |
for long have I fared,
And gentle greeting,
giant."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
9. "Why standest thou
there | on the floor
whilst thou speakest?
A seat shalt thou have
in my hall;
Then soon shall we
know | whose knowledge
is more,
The guest's or the
sage's gray."
<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
10. "If a poor man
reaches | the home of
the rich,
Let him wisely speak or
be still;
For to him who speaks |
with the hard of heart
Will chattering ever
work ill."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
11. "Speak forth now,
Gagnrath, | if there
from the floor
Thou wouldst thy
wisdom make known:
What name has the
steed | that each morn
anew
The day for mankind
doth draw?"
<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
12. "Skinfaxi is he, | the
steed who for men
The glittering day doth
draw;
The best of horses |
to heroes he seems,
And brightly his mane
doth burn."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
13. "Speak forth now,
Gagnrath, | if there
from the floor
Thou wouldst thy
wisdom make known:
What name has the
steed | that from East
anew
Brings night for the
noble gods?"
<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
14. "Hrimfaxi name they
| the steed that anew
Brings night for the
noble gods;
Each morning foam |
from his bit there falls,
And thence come the
dews in the dales."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
15. "Speak forth now,
Gagnrath, | if there
from the floor
Thou wouldst thy
wisdom make known:
What name has the
river | that 'twixt the
realms
Of the gods and the
giants goes?"
<END PAGE>
Othin spoke:

16. "Ifing is the river |
that 'twixt the realms
Of the gods and the
giants goes;
For all time ever | open
it flows,
No ice on the river
there is."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
17. "Speak forth now,
Gagnrath, | if there
from the floor
Thou wouldst thy
wisdom make known:
What name has the field
| where in fight shall
meet
Surt and the gracious
gods?"
<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
18. "Vigrith is the field
| where in fight shall
meet
Surt and the gracious
gods;
A hundred miles | each
way does it measure.
And so are its
boundaries set."

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
19. "Wise art thou,
guest! | To my bench
shalt thou go,
In our seats let us
speak together;
Here in the hall | our
heads, O guest,
Shall we wager our
wisdom upon."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
20. "First answer me
well, | if thy wisdom
avails,
And thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
In earliest time |
whence came the earth,
Or the sky, thou giant
sage?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
21. "Out of Ymir's flesh
| was fashioned the
earth,
And the mountains were
made of his bones;
The sky from the
frost-cold | giant's
skull,
And the ocean out of
his blood."
<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
22. "Next answer me
well, | if thy wisdom
avails,
And thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
Whence came the moon,
| o'er the world of men
That fares, and the
flaming sun?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
23. "Mundilferi is he |
who begat the moon,
And fathered the
flaming sun;
The round of heaven |
each day they run,
To tell the time for
men."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
24. "Third answer me
well, | if wise thou art
called,
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
Whence came the day, |
o'er mankind that
fares,
Or night with the
narrowing moon?"
<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
25. "The father of day
| is Delling called,
And the night was
begotten by Nor;
Full moon and old | by
the gods were
fashioned,
To tell the time for
men."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
26. "Fourth answer me
well, | if wise thou art
called,
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
Whence did winter come,
| or the summer warm,
First with the gracious
gods?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
27. "Vindsval he was |
who was winter's
father,
And Svosuth summer
begat;"
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
28. "Fifth answer me
well, | if wise thou art
called,
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
What giant first | was
fashioned of old,
And the eldest of
Ymir's kin?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
29. "Winters
unmeasured | ere
earth was made
Was the birth of
Bergelmir;
Thruthgelmir's son |
was the giant strong,
And Aurgelmir's
grandson of old."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
30. "Sixth answer me
well, | if wise thou art
called,
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
Whence did Aurgelmir
come | with the giants'
kin,
Long since, thou giant
sage?"
<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
31. "Down from
Elivagar | did venom
drop,
And waxed till a giant it
was;
And thence arose | our
giants' race,
And thus so fierce are
we found."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
32. "Seventh answer
me well, | if wise thou
art called,
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
How begat he children,
| the giant grim,
Who never a giantess
knew?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
33. "They say 'neath
the arms | of the giant
of ice
Grew man-child and
maid together;
And foot with foot | did
the wise one fashion
A son that six heads
bore."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
34. "Eighth answer me
well, | if wise thou art
called,
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
What farthest back |
dost thou bear in mind?
For wide is thy wisdom,
giant!"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
35. "Winters
unmeasured | ere
earth was made
Was the birth of
Bergelmir;
This first knew I well, |
when the giant wise
In a boat of old was
borne."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
36. "Ninth answer me
well, | if wise thou art
called
If thou knowest it,
Vafthruthnir, now:
Whence comes the wind
| that fares o'er the
waves
Yet never itself is
seen?"
<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
37. "In an eagle's
guise | at the end of
heaven
Hr√¶svelg sits, they say;
And from his wings |
does the wind come
forth
To move o'er the world
of men."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
38. "Tenth answer me
now, | if thou knowest
all
The fate that is fixed
for the gods:
Whence came up Njorth
| to the kin of the
gods,--
(Rich in temples | and
shrines he rules,--)
<END PAGE>
Though of gods he was
never begot?"

Vafthruthnir spake:
39. "In the home of the
Wanes | did the wise
ones create him,
And gave him as pledge
to the gods;
At the fall of the world
| shall he fare once
more
<END PAGE>
Home to the Wanes so
wise."

Othin spake:
40. "Eleventh answer
me well, | . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . .
What men . . . . . . | in . . .
. . . home
Each day to fight go
forth?"
<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
41. "The heroes all | in
Othin's hall
Each day to fight go
forth;
They fell each other, |
and fare from the
fight
All healed full soon to
sit."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
42. "Twelfth answer me
now | how all thou
knowest
Of the fate that is
fixed for the gods;
Of the runes of the
gods | and the giants'
race
The truth indeed dost
thou tell,
<END PAGE>
(And wide is thy wisdom,
giant!)"

Vafthruthnir spake:
43. "Of the runes of
the gods | and the
giants' race
The truth indeed can I
tell,
(For to every world
have I won;)
<END PAGE>
To nine worlds came I, |
to Niflhel beneath,
The home where dead
men dwell."

Othin spake:
44. "Much have I fared,
| much have I found,
Much have I got of the
gods:
What shall live of
mankind | when at last
there comes
<END PAGE>
The mighty winter to
men?"

Vafthruthnir spake:
45. "In Hoddmimir's
wood | shall hide
themselves
Lif and Lifthrasir then;
The morning dews | for
meat shall they have,
Such food shall men
then find."
<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
46. "Much have I fared,
| much have I found,
Much have I got of the
gods:
Whence comes the sun |
to the smooth sky back,
When Fenrir has
snatched it forth?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
47. "A daughter bright
| Alfrothul bears
Ere Fenrir snatches
her forth;
Her mother's paths |
shall the maiden tread
When the gods to death
have gone."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
48. "Much have I fared,
| much have I found,
Much have I got of the
gods:
What maidens are they,
| so wise of mind.
That forth o'er the
sea shall fare?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
49. "O'er Mogthrasir's
hill | shall the maidens
pass,
And three are their
throngs that come;
They all shall protect |
the dwellers on earth,
Though they come of
the giants' kin."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
50. "Much have I fared,
| much have I found,
Much have I got of the
gods:
Who then shall rule |
the realm of the gods,
When the fires of Surt
have sunk?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
51. "In the gods' home
Vithar | and Vali shall
dwell,
When the fires of Surt
have sunk;
Mothi and Magni | shall
Mjollnir have
When Vingnir falls in
fight."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
52. "Much have I fared,
| much have I found,
Much have I got of the
gods:
What shall bring the
doom | of death to
Othin,
When the gods to
destruction go?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
53. "The wolf shall fell
| the father of men,
And this shall Vithar
avenge;
The terrible jaws |
shall he tear apart,
And so the wolf shall
he slay."

<END PAGE>
Othin spake:
54. "Much have I fared,
| much have I found,
Much have I got from
the gods:
What spake Othin
himself | in the ears of
his son,
Ere in the bale-fire he
burned?"

<END PAGE>
Vafthruthnir spake:
55. "No man can tell |
what in olden time
Thou spak'st in the
ears of thy son;
With fated mouth | the
fall of the gods
And mine olden tales
have I told;
With Othin in knowledge |
now have I striven,
<END PAGE>
