VÖLUNDARKVITHA
The Lay of Völund
<END PAGE>
1. Maids from the south
| through Myrkwood
flew,
Fair and young, | their
fate to follow;
On the shore of the
sea | to rest them they
sat,
The maids of the south,
| and flax they spun.

<END PAGE>
2. . . . . . . . . . .
Hlathguth and Hervor, |
Hlothver's children,
And Olrun the Wise |
Kjar's daughter was.

3. . . . . . . . . . .
One in her arms | took
Egil then
To her bosom white, |
the woman fair.
<END PAGE>
4. Swan-White
second,-- |
swan-feathers she
wore,
. . . . . . . . . .
And her arms the third
| of the sisters threw
Next round Völund's |
neck so white.

<END PAGE>
5. There did they sit |
for seven winters,
In the eighth at last |
came their longing
again,
(And in the ninth | did
need divide them).
The maidens yearned |
for the murky wood,
The fair young maids, |
their fate to follow.
<END PAGE>
6. Völund home | from
his hunting came,
From a weary way, | the
weather-wise bowman,
Slagfith and Egil | the
hall found empty,
Out and in went they, |
everywhere seeking.

<END PAGE>
7. East fared Egil |
after Olrun,
And Slagfith south | to
seek for Swan-White;
Völund alone | in
Ulfdalir lay,
. . . . . . . . . .

8. Red gold he
fashioned | with fairest
gems,
<END PAGE>
And rings he strung |
on ropes of bast;
So for his wife | he
waited long,
If the fair one home |
might come to him.

9. This Nithuth learned,
| the lord of the Njars,
That Völund alone | in
Ulfdalir lay;
<END PAGE>
By night went his men, |
their mail-coats were
studded,
Their shields in the
waning | moonlight
shone.

10. From their saddles
the gable | wall they
sought,
And in they went | at
the end of the hall;
<END PAGE>
Rings they saw there |
on ropes of bast,
Seven hundred | the
hero had.

11. Off they took them,
| but all they left
Save one alone | which
they bore away.
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
<END PAGE>
12. Völund home | from
his hunting came,
From a weary way, | the
weather-wise bowman;
A brown bear's flesh |
would he roast with
fire;
Soon the wood so dry |
was burning well,
(The wind-dried wood |
that Völund's was).
<END PAGE>
13. On the bearskin he
rested, | and counted
the rings,
The master of elves, |
but one he missed;
That Hlothver's
daughter | had it he
thought,
And the all-wise maid |
had come once more.

<END PAGE>
14. So long he sat |
that he fell asleep,
His waking empty | of
gladness was;
Heavy chains | he saw
on his hands,
And fetters bound | his
feet together.

<END PAGE>
Völund spake:
15. "What men are they
| who thus have laid
Ropes of bast | to bind
me now?"
Then Nithuth called, |
the lord of the Njars:
How gottest thou,
Völund, | greatest of
elves,
These treasures of
ours | in Ulfdalir?
<END PAGE>
Völund spake:
16. "The gold was not |
on Grani's way,
Far, methinks, is our
realm | from the hills
of the Rhine;
I mind me that
treasures | more we
had
When happy together |
at home we were."
<END PAGE>
17. Without stood the
wife | of Nithuth wise,
And in she came | from
the end of the hall;
On the floor she stood,
| and softly spoke:
Not kind does he look |
who comes from the
wood.
King Nithuth gave to his
daughter Bothvild the
gold ring that he had
taken from the bast
rope in Völund's
<END PAGE>
house, and he himself
wore the sword that
Völund had had. The
queen spake:
18. "The glow of his
eyes | is like gleaming
snakes,
His teeth he gnashes |
if now is shown
The sword, or
Bothvild's | ring he
sees;
<END PAGE>
Let them straightway
cut | his sinews of
strength,
And set him then | in
Sævarstath."
So was it done: the
sinews in his
knee-joints were cut,
and he was set in an
island which was near
the
<END PAGE>
mainland, and was
called Sævarstath.
There he smithied for
the king all kinds of
precious things. No man

dared to go to him,
save only the king
himself. Völund spake:
19. "At Nithuth's girdle
| gleams the sword
<END PAGE>
That I sharpened keen
| with cunningest craft,
(And hardened the
steel | with highest
skill;)
The bright blade far |
forever is borne,
(Nor back shall I see it
| borne to my smithy;)
Now Bothvild gets | the
golden ring
<END PAGE>
(That was once my
bride's,-- | ne'er well
shall it be.)"

20. He sat, nor slept, |
and smote with his
hammer,
Fast for Nithuth |
wonders he fashioned;
Two boys did go | in his
door to gaze,
<END PAGE>
Nithuth's sons, | into
Sævarstath.

21. They came to the
chest, | and they
craved the keys,
The evil was open |
when in they looked;
To the boys it seemed |
that gems they saw,
Gold in plenty | and
precious stones.
<END PAGE>
Völund spake:
22. "Come ye alone, |
the next day come,
Gold to you both | shall
then be given;
Tell not the maids | or
the men of the hall,
To no one say | that me
you have sought."

<END PAGE>
23. . . . . . . . . . .
Early did brother | to
brother call:
Swift let us go | the
rings to see.

24. They came to the
chest, | and they
craved the keys,
The evil was open |
when in they looked;
<END PAGE>
He smote off their
heads, | and their feet
he hid
Under the sooty |
straps of the bellows.

25. Their skulls, once
hid | by their hair, he
took,
Set them in silver | and
sent them to Nithuth;
<END PAGE>
Gems full fair | from
their eyes he
fashioned,
To Nithuth's wife | so
wise he gave them.

26. And from the teeth
| of the twain he
wrought
A brooch for the
breast, | to Bothvild he
sent it;
<END PAGE>
. . . . . . . . . .

27. Bothvild then | of
her ring did boast,
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . | "The ring I
have broken,
I dare not say it | save
to thee."

<END PAGE>
Völund spake:
28. 'I shall weld the
break | in the gold so
well
That fairer than ever |
thy father shall find it,
And better much | thy
mother shall think it,
And thou no worse |
than ever it was."

<END PAGE>
29. Beer he brought, |
he was better in
cunning,
Until in her seat | full
soon she slept.

Völund spake:
Now vengeance I have |
for all my hurts,
Save one alone, | on
the evil woman.
<END PAGE>
30. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
Quoth Völund: "Would |
that well were the
sinews
Maimed in my feet | by
Nithuth's men."

31. Laughing Völund |
rose aloft,
Weeping Bothvild | went
from the isle,
<END PAGE>
For her lover's flight |
and her father's
wrath.

32. Without stood the
wife | of Nithuth wise,
And in she came | from
the end of the hall;
But he by the wall | in
weariness sat:
Wakest thou, Nithuth, |
lord of the Njars?
<END PAGE>
Nithuth spake:
33. "Always I wake, |
and ever joyless,
Little I sleep | since my
sons were slain;
Cold is my head, | cold
was thy counsel,
One thing, with Völund |
to speak, I wish.

<END PAGE>
34. . . . . . . . . . .
Answer me, Völund, |
greatest of elves,
What happed with my
boys | that hale once
were?

Völund spake:
35. "First shalt thou all
| the oaths now swear,
By the rail of ship, |
and the rim of shield,
<END PAGE>
By the shoulder of
steed, | and the edge
of sword,
That to Völund's wife |
thou wilt work no ill,
Nor yet my bride | to
her death wilt bring,
Though a wife I should
have | that well thou
knowest,
And a child I should
have | within thy hall.
<END PAGE>
36. "Seek the smithy |
that thou didst set,
Thou shalt find the
bellows | sprinkled with
blood;
I smote off the heads |
of both thy sons,
And their feet 'neath
the sooty | straps I
hid.

<END PAGE>
37. "Their skulls, once
hid | by their hair, I
took,
Set them in silver | and
sent them to Nithuth;
Gems full fair | from
their eyes I fashioned,
To Nithuth's wife | so
wise I gave them.

<END PAGE>
38. "And from the teeth
| of the twain I wrought
A brooch for the
breast, | to Bothvild I
gave it;
Now big with child |
does Bothvild go,
The only daughter | ye
two had ever."

<END PAGE>
Nithuth spake:
39. "Never spakest
thou word | that worse
could hurt me,
Nor that made me,
Völund, | more bitter
for vengeance;
There is no man so
high | from thy horse
to take thee,
Or so doughty an
archer | as down to
shoot thee,
<END PAGE>
While high in the clouds
| thy course thou
takest."

40. Laughing Völund |
rose aloft,
But left in sadness |
Nithuth sat.
. . . . . . . . . .

<END PAGE>
41. Then spake Nithuth,
| lord of the Njars:
Rise up, Thakkrath, |
best of my thralls,
Bid Bothvild come, | the
bright-browed maid,
Bedecked so fair, | with
her father to speak.

<END PAGE>
42. . . . . . . . . . .
Is it true, Bothvild, |
that which was told me;
Once in the isle | with
Völund wert thou?

Bothvild spake:
43. "True is it, Nithuth, |
that which was told
thee,
Once in the isle | with
Völund was I,
<END PAGE>
